Total lines: 253
Lead Intelligence & AI-Powered Outreach System
Software Design Document - Internal Edition
This document defines the final operating design for an internal lead intelligence platform. The system preserves raw intake data, normalizes and deduplicates records, builds company context, anchors all messaging in a maintained capability library, and uses AI only as a constrained drafting assistant. The intent is not to automate outreach blindly. The intent is to give the company a small, reliable, auditable, and highly controlled engine for moving from raw records to approved conversation.
The central design choice is simple: the company's internal solutions and proof points are the primary asset, company research is the supporting context, and every outbound message is built from those two layers before it ever reaches Outlook.

1. Executive Summary
The system is a closed-loop lead intelligence and outbound execution platform built for a single internal company environment. It exists because raw spreadsheets do not become a sales engine on their own. A spreadsheet can hold volume, but it cannot hold context, consistency, or memory. This platform closes that gap by turning imported rows into normalized entities, linking each contact to a company, attaching research and capability context, and then using AI to draft outreach that reflects what the company actually knows how to do.
The operating intent is not to create a CRM, a marketing automation suite, or a generic campaign engine. The intent is to create a controlled intelligence-to-outreach pipeline where internal capabilities are the center of gravity. The platform should know what the company can sell, what problems it solves, what evidence it can support, and which industries or company types it is most credible with. Company research is important, but it is secondary to the capability library. The message should always start from a real service, a real proof point, and a real reason to reach out.
The message lifecycle is deliberately strict. Data enters through batch import. It is cleaned, normalized, and deduplicated. Company records are created or updated. Research notes and internal capability items are attached. AI receives only the curated context it needs. Drafts are reviewed by a human before they are allowed to reach Outlook. Replies, bounces, and suppressions feed back into the data so the system becomes cleaner and more accurate over time. The result is a simple operating loop: raw data to qualified intent to context to message to send, with every step recorded and reviewable.
The success measure for this system is not raw email volume. Success is the percentage of leads that can be accurately cleaned, correctly tied to a company, matched to a relevant service angle, converted into a credible draft, and sent without violating internal rules or losing traceability. In practical terms, the system should help the business use its own knowledge more consistently, reduce manual copywriting effort, improve list hygiene, and produce messages that sound like the company actually wrote them for the recipient's business context.
1.1 What the platform must do
The platform must import large static datasets, preserve the source of every row, identify duplicates, calculate whether a record is ready for outreach, and keep company context reusable across all contacts at the same organization. It must also surface where the data is incomplete or risky, rather than hiding problems behind a polished interface. A lead should never become send-ready just because it exists in the database. It becomes send-ready only when it is clean, connected, understood, and supported by an approved outreach angle.
1.2 What the platform must not do
The platform must not become a sprawling CRM with tasks, deals, service tickets, project plans, and unrelated operational clutter. It must not scrape the open web indiscriminately. It must not invent company capabilities that are not in the internal knowledge base. It must not send automatically without a human approval gate. It must not hide raw values or overwrite imported history. Those boundaries are not limitations; they are the reason the system stays trustworthy.
2. System Intent and Design Principles
2.1 Internal capabilities first
The most important design rule is that the company's internal capabilities and solutions come first. The platform should treat every case study, service description, delivery approach, proof point, and approved call-to-action as a reusable asset. These assets are not attachments to the system; they are the memory of the business. When an AI draft is produced, it should be built from that memory before anything else is considered. If the system cannot find a credible internal solution angle, the right response is not to improvise. The right response is to flag the record for more research or a different service angle.
This principle changes the way the entire product behaves. Instead of asking, "What can we say to this lead?" the system asks, "What do we know how to solve, and which part of that solution is relevant to this company?" That shift protects the company from generic outreach. It also helps the sales team repeat its best ideas without rewriting them every time. The platform becomes a knowledge amplifier rather than a content generator.
2.2 Controlled intelligence, not automation
The platform should feel intelligent, but it should remain controlled. That means every transformation must be explainable and reviewable. Importing a lead should not silently change the meaning of the data. Duplicates should not disappear without a log. AI should not be free to invent missing facts. Sending should not happen because a workflow rule happened to fire at the wrong time. Every major action needs a visible state change and an audit trail.
In practice, controlled intelligence means the system can assist with judgment but cannot replace judgment. AI can suggest an opening sentence based on company context. It cannot decide that a lead is safe to email if the record is suppressed. It can recommend a solution angle, but it cannot claim experience that does not exist in the capability library. It can produce a draft, but the draft stays in review until a human approves it. The system is therefore more like a disciplined assistant than an autonomous agent.
2.3 One source of truth, one company context
Every contact belongs to a company, and every company can have one shared context record. That structure prevents duplicated research and inconsistent messaging. When three people from the same company are imported, the system should not create three separate versions of the same company story. It should create one company anchor, one research card, and one evolving set of notes that all contacts can reuse. This makes the platform simpler to maintain and more useful to the people writing outreach.
The same rule applies to raw data and edited data. The imported value is preserved. The cleaned value is preserved. The user-edited value is preserved. The system should never destroy its own history just because a user improves a field. That history is what lets the team trust the platform later, especially when a batch was messy or the source file was inconsistent.
2.4 Simple workflows, low cognitive load
The interface should not make the user think like an admin of a software platform. It should make the user feel like they are working through a very small, very clear sequence: import, clean, review, research, draft, approve, send, and learn from the results. Anything that does not support that sequence should be compressed, hidden behind settings, or removed. A good internal tool does not expose all of its machinery in the main workflow. It exposes only the decisions that matter.
This is why the design should prefer a narrow number of screens, a narrow number of lead states, and a narrow number of action buttons. The user should be able to understand what will happen before they click it. If the system needs a complex rule, that rule should live in the background. If the system needs a complex explanation, that explanation should appear in the audit trail or the detail view, not in the default path.
3. Roles and Permissions
3.1 Administrator
The administrator is responsible for the structural settings of the platform. This role manages import templates, column mappings, user access, suppression rules, capability library structure, AI settings, send limits, and integration credentials. The administrator can also revise scoring rules, archive old batches, restore records, and control any global kill switch such as pause-all-sends. Because the system is internal, the admin role should be powerful but still accountable through audit logs.
3.2 Reviewer
The reviewer is the quality gatekeeper. This role handles fuzzy duplicates, risky email records, uncertain company matches, and AI drafts that need closer inspection. The reviewer does not need to manage infrastructure, but they do need visibility into raw values, cleaned values, source history, and the reason a record was flagged. Their job is to protect data quality and message quality at the point where the system would otherwise be tempted to guess.
3.3 Sender
The sender is the person or role allowed to approve drafts and release them into Outlook. The sender should see the queue, the send schedule, the daily cap, and the status of each outbound item. The sender does not need to manage the entire data model. They need a fast, confident way to review a draft, edit it if necessary, and move it forward. The platform should optimize this role for speed without allowing the sending step to bypass policy.
3.4 Viewer
The viewer can search, inspect, and learn from the system without changing core settings. This role is useful for managers, sales leadership, and other internal stakeholders who need visibility into the lead base, the quality of the data, the state of the queue, and the performance of the outreach process. A viewer should not be able to alter suppression rules, edit capability claims, or send email.
3.5 Permission philosophy
Permissions should be role-based but simple. The system should not become a labyrinth of per-field permissions unless there is a real internal need. The main thing is that anything that can affect compliance, deliverability, or company positioning must be restricted and logged. Editing a contact note is less sensitive than changing the approval text in the capability library. Adjusting a lead status is less sensitive than removing a suppression entry. The permission model should reflect those differences without overwhelming the user.
4. System Architecture and Runtime Model
4.1 High-level layers
The application should be understood as five connected layers. The first layer is ingestion, where files enter the system and are staged. The second layer is data processing, where fields are normalized, duplicates are detected, and rows are classified. The third layer is intelligence, where company context and capability knowledge are assembled. The fourth layer is generation and execution, where AI produces drafts and Outlook handles approved mail. The fifth layer is feedback, where replies, bounces, suppressions, and health refresh jobs keep the data alive.
These layers should be loosely coupled so that one part can fail without destroying the entire platform. A problem in AI drafting should not block batch import. A temporary issue in Outlook should not erase cleaned company records. A duplicate review queue should not stop a weekly email health run. The architecture should therefore favor clear interfaces, job queues, and explicit state transitions over hidden cross-dependencies.
4.2 Runtime behavior
The runtime should be batch-driven and idempotent. When a file is uploaded, the system should be able to reprocess the same batch without creating duplicate records. When a record is edited, the deduplication process should be able to run again and return the same logical answer. When a message is prepared, the output should be reproducible from the same inputs, subject to the current version of the capability library and research card. This reduces operational surprises and makes debugging possible.
Because the intended dataset is large, the backend should process rows in chunks and push expensive work into background workers. Heavy operations such as AI generation, email health refresh, and duplicate rechecks should not block the user interface. The user should see progress, status, and queue counts while the system continues working in the background. That balance keeps the tool responsive without pretending that 100,000 rows can be treated like a small list.
4.3 Storage model
The system should maintain separate storage for raw files, staged rows, master records, capability assets, generated drafts, outbound logs, replies, and audit events. Raw imports are preserved as evidence. Master records hold the current truth. Staged rows hold exceptions and intermediate work. Drafts hold AI output and human edits. Logs hold delivery events. Audit records hold who changed what and when. This separation is important because it allows the team to recover from mistakes, analyze problems, and trace a message back to the source input.
4.4 Integration model
The only mandatory external integration is Outlook for sending and reply tracking. Any company research connected to the system should be curated and limited to company-level and industry-level context. The platform should not depend on a patchwork of unrelated tools. If a public source is used, it should be chosen because it helps the company understand the prospect's context and can be stored as a short, reviewable note. The architecture should always prefer a compact internal record over a sprawling external dependency graph.
5. Data Model and Core Entities
5.1 Contact record
The contact record is the person-level entity. It should store the person's raw imported name, normalized name, current edited name, email, LinkedIn URL, title, role, phone if available, location, source batch, consent status, email health status, and any custom fields that came with the original row. The contact should not be treated as a flat spreadsheet line. It should be a stateful object with history. That means the system must preserve the imported version of each important field, the normalized version created by the cleaning pipeline, and the current user-edited value when the user corrects the record.
The contact also carries operational metadata. It must know whether it is ready, drafted, queued, sent, replied, bounced, invalid, risky, duplicate, suppressed, or archived. It must know when it was last checked, when it was last contacted, and whether it belongs to a suppression list. It must also know whether it is safe for AI to draft against it. That safety depends on both the contact's own data and the company context attached to it.
5.2 Company record
The company record is the anchor of the system. It stores the organization's raw name, normalized name, domain, industry, size range, location, website, and any company-level research notes. It should also store the current internal summary of what the company appears to do, what problems the business can solve there, and which contacts are already connected to it. A company record exists even when only one contact is known. If a company name is missing during import, the system should create a placeholder rather than leaving the contact floating without context.
The company object is where shared intelligence lives. A company can have one research card, one set of notes, one observed pain-point profile, and one set of relevant solution angles. All contacts at that company should reuse this context automatically. This is what keeps the outreach process efficient and consistent. It prevents the platform from re-researching the same account for every person and helps the user keep a single view of the company story.
5.3 Batch record
Every import must create a batch record. The batch identifies the source file, the user who uploaded it, the time of import, the file hash, the mapping profile used, and the current processing status. The batch is the backbone of traceability. It should answer where the data came from, how it was interpreted, which rows were accepted, which rows were rejected, and whether the file has already been seen. If a later problem appears in the database, the batch record is what lets the team trace the issue back to its origin.
5.4 Capability asset
Capability assets are the company's internal knowledge objects. They can represent a service line, a packaged solution, a case study, a proof point, a common objection response, or a pre-approved call-to-action. The platform should treat these assets as structured content rather than loose text documents. Each capability asset should carry a title, summary, category, service line, target industries, target roles, associated problems, supporting evidence, version, active status, and source document references. The AI drafting engine should not need to read the entire document when a smaller, structured capability summary is enough.
5.5 Research card
The research card is the company-level context block. It stores approved observations about the company and its industry, such as what the business appears to sell, what size or footprint it has, what public signals are available, and what internal notes have already been captured. The card should separate facts from hypotheses. Facts are sourced or observed. Hypotheses are internal working ideas that help with outreach but are not presented as certainty. This distinction matters because the AI should be able to write a relevant message without turning speculation into false claims.
5.6 Draft, queue, reply, and audit entities
The draft entity stores the AI-generated subject, body, CTA, and any explanation metadata used for internal review. The queue entity stores the sendable item, schedule, mailbox, and send status. The reply entity stores message threading information and classification. The bounce entity stores delivery failure details. The suppression entity stores reasons a lead should never be contacted again or should be paused for a time. The audit entity stores the full change history of the system. Together, these entities make the platform explainable and recoverable.
6. Ingestion and Batch Management
6.1 Standard upload template
The platform should accept a standard Excel or CSV template, but it should not force the user to rebuild every source file by hand before import. The import interface should allow column mapping so that different source sheets can be aligned to the internal schema. The key requirement is consistency after ingestion, not rigidity before it. A file can contain many columns, but the system must know which ones are core fields, which are custom fields, and which are simply metadata that should be ignored.
The template should support a small set of required identifiers and then allow additional company and contact columns as needed. Because the platform is internal, the template should reflect the company's actual operating data rather than an artificial vendor schema. If a user has email, LinkedIn, company name, website, title, address, or any other useful detail, the system should accept it as long as it can be mapped or stored cleanly. The goal is not to reduce the data into a narrow form; the goal is to make the data dependable after it enters the system.
6.2 Column mapping memory
The first time a file type is imported, the user should map the columns to the internal schema. The system should save that mapping as an import profile. On later uploads with similar headers, the platform should auto-map the columns and only ask the user to confirm if something changed. This saves time and reduces mistakes. A team that imports from the same source repeatedly should not have to re-teach the system the same structure every week.
Mapping memory should be keyed by the header row shape or by a named profile chosen by the user. If the source layout changes, the system should not silently guess. It should show the mismatch. This is especially important for fields that look similar but have different meanings, such as company title versus job title or company location versus contact location. Import convenience is useful only if it does not destroy data quality.
6.3 Staging and review
Imports should land in staging first. Staging is the safe buffer between raw input and the master database. Every row should be classified in staging as clean, questionable, duplicate, or invalid. Clean rows can move forward automatically. Questionable rows should wait for human review. Invalid rows should stay visible with a clear reason. Duplicates should be held long enough for the system or the reviewer to decide whether to merge, reject, or keep one version.
This stage makes the system resilient. If a file is messy, the user does not have to throw the whole import away. If one row has a malformed email but the rest of the batch is good, the clean records can still progress. If a company name is slightly different but clearly the same organization, the platform can surface the conflict instead of guessing in silence.
6.4 Batch traceability and archive
Every row in the master database must retain a pointer to the batch that created it. This creates a chain of custody from source file to final record. The batch itself should be archivable so that old imports can be hidden from the active list without being deleted. Archiving should be reversible because old source data can become important later when the team needs to explain where a record came from or reprocess a file after the schema changes.
The system should also allow error export. When a row fails validation or needs review, the user should be able to download a file containing the problem rows and the reason for each issue. This makes remediation practical. A large internal list is not useful if the operator cannot quickly fix a few bad rows and re-import them.
6.5 File hash protection
The platform should hash incoming files and reject exact re-imports of the same file. This prevents duplicate batches, accidental double counting, and repeated processing of the same source. The hash should be stored with the batch so that the system can answer whether a file has been seen before. If a file is intentionally reprocessed, the operator should have to make that choice visibly rather than causing a duplicate by mistake.
7. Data Quality and Validation
7.1 Normalization pipeline
The cleaning pipeline should turn inconsistent spreadsheet entries into stable machine-readable values. Names should be trimmed and normalized for spacing and casing. Company names should be preserved in their raw human-readable form, but a separate normalized match key should be created for duplicate detection. Websites should be standardized so that protocol noise and trailing slashes do not break matching. LinkedIn URLs should be converted into a predictable form. Phone numbers should be formatted consistently when possible. Location fields should be normalized enough to support searching and grouping without pretending that every source sheet used the same naming convention.
The point of normalization is not to make the data look pretty. The point is to make downstream logic reliable. Duplicate detection, scoring, search, and research all depend on the data being comparable. A user should be able to search for a company once and find it again later, even if the imported source changed the capitalization or punctuation.
7.2 Email health score
The platform should treat email validity as a confidence score rather than as a magical truth. A record may be syntactically valid, domain-resolvable, and still not be safely contactable. A record may be unknown because the system has not yet sent to it or seen enough feedback. A record may be risky because the domain looks valid but bounce history or poor structure suggests caution. A record may be invalid because the address is malformed, clearly disposable, or repeatedly rejected.
This distinction is important because internal systems often confuse "usable for drafting" with "safe to send." The platform should keep those ideas separate. A risky or unknown record can still be stored, researched, segmented, and drafted against. It just should not be released into the send queue until it has the right status. The score should be recalculated on a schedule and also on demand when new signal arrives.
7.3 Weekly refresh
The system should run a weekly health job across non-suppressed contacts. That job should refresh syntax checks, domain checks, MX checks, disposable-domain checks, bounce history, and reply history. The goal is not to prove the existence of an inbox with perfect certainty. The goal is to keep the database fresh enough that the send queue does not fill with stale addresses. If a contact becomes bad or starts bouncing, the system should move it out of the active set quickly.
Weekly refresh is also a data trust mechanism. It shows the team that the platform is not a dead archive. It is an active list that learns from use. Every bounce, reply, and pause contributes to the score and to the health of the database. That feedback loop is one of the most valuable parts of the system because it keeps the lead base useful over time.
7.4 Manual review queue
Some records should be routed to a manual review queue when the system is uncertain. This queue may include risky email records, ambiguous company matches, incomplete rows, or contacts whose duplicate confidence is too low for automatic resolution. The reviewer can accept, reject, or edit the row. The manual queue keeps the system honest. It is better to admit uncertainty than to hide it under an automated decision.
The review queue should be efficient. It should show the raw value, the normalized value, the source batch, the reason for the flag, and the most relevant company context. A reviewer should be able to resolve a row without opening five different screens. The queue is not a punishment; it is the place where the platform protects its own quality.
8. Duplicate Detection and Merge Governance
8.1 Contact identity rules
Contact duplicates should be identified using a clear priority order. The strongest match is exact email. If email is not available or is intentionally absent for a non-send-ready record, exact LinkedIn URL is the next strongest match. If those are absent or inconclusive, the system can compare normalized full name plus normalized company name. Fuzzy matching can help catch small inconsistencies, but it should never be allowed to override strong evidence without review.
The point of the identity rules is to reduce accidental duplication without collapsing distinct people into one record. In a large dataset, two people can share a name and even work at the same company. The deduplication engine must therefore be careful. Exact identifiers should drive automation. Ambiguous matches should drive review. The system should prefer a cautious false negative over an incorrect merge when the evidence is weak.
8.2 Company identity rules
Company duplicates should be matched using exact website domain first, then normalized company name. Company matching is often easier than contact matching, but it still needs guardrails. Businesses may have multiple domains, legal entity names, or brand names. The system should not destroy that complexity. It should simply create one company anchor with enough metadata to recognize that multiple source variants may refer to the same organization.
If the company cannot be confidently identified, the platform should create a placeholder record and allow later correction. The important thing is that the contact is never left without a company link. Even a placeholder is better than a floating row because it preserves the relational structure and gives the reviewer a place to fix the record later.
8.3 Merge precedence
When duplicate records are merged, the system should use a clear precedence order. A manually verified or edited value should win over an imported value. A more recent non-empty imported value should win over an older value when no manual correction exists. A blank should never overwrite a real field. The goal is to preserve signal and avoid silent data loss. A merge should produce a single surviving record and a full log of what happened to the others.
This precedence order matters because duplicates are often not identical. One batch may have a better company name, another may have a better title, and a third may have a more accurate phone number. The merge logic should therefore be field-aware rather than record-blind. The user should be able to understand why one field won and another field did not.
8.4 Merge audit trail
Every merge should generate an audit trail with source record identifiers, field-level before and after values, timestamp, and the reason for the merge decision. The audit trail is necessary both for trust and for debugging. If a team member later asks why a record changed, the answer should not require guesswork. The answer should be visible in the system.
The archive copy of the duplicate should remain accessible in a historical view. That allows the team to trace back to a prior state if necessary and gives visibility into how the deduplication engine behaved over time. In a large internal dataset, merge history is not a luxury. It is a requirement.
9. Company Intelligence and Research Cards
9.1 Company-level context
Each company should have its own context card that collects the information the system knows about the organization. That card can include industry, size, geography, website, public description, recent notes, known contacts, prior conversations, and internal research observations. The card should be visible whenever any associated contact is opened. That way, a sender or reviewer sees the company story once and can reuse it across every person at that account.
The company card should not be a generic notes dump. It should be a structured context object that supports outreach. The goal is to answer questions like what the company does, why the company might care about the company's services, what angle has already been tried, and which conversation route is most credible. A good company card makes drafting faster and more relevant.
9.2 External context boundary
External knowledge is allowed only to the extent that it helps the system understand the company and its industry. That means the research layer should stay narrow and source-tagged. It may include company website observations, public descriptions, approved company news, sector language, and industry patterns that are relevant to the conversation. It should not turn into unrestricted web scraping or broad speculative research.
This boundary matters because the platform is not trying to know everything. It is trying to know enough to write a credible message. If the team has a public source that clearly says what the company does or what industry it belongs to, that is useful. If a fact is uncertain, it should be labeled as a hypothesis or omitted. The draft generator should never be forced to guess in a way that could become a false claim.
9.3 Shared reuse across contacts
When multiple contacts belong to the same company, the research card should be reused automatically. This reduces duplication and keeps the messaging more consistent. If a company-level note is updated, every contact attached to that company benefits from the update. The same is true for the knowledge of which solution angles are relevant. One company-level context object is more valuable than repeating the same notes across multiple contact records.
This shared reuse also improves team behavior. Instead of each user inventing a slightly different version of the same company story, the system provides one shared account view. That shared view can be refined over time. The team can add notes after a call, mark a product area as a better fit, or record that a certain industry angle performed well. Those learnings should live on the company object, not only in the inbox of the person who happened to send the last email.
9.4 Research freshness
Research should have a freshness timestamp and a source trail. If the company card has not been updated in months, the system should make that visible. That does not mean the card becomes useless; it means the user knows how much trust to place in it. Freshness is especially important when the company has changed size, product direction, or market focus. A stale card can cause a good message to sound outdated.
The platform should support light research updates without turning the process into a research project for every lead. The best version of this feature is compact: a few short, curated notes, a few key sources, and a clean way to see what changed. Enough context to draft well, not enough noise to slow the system down.
10. Internal Capability Library and Solution Knowledge Base
10.1 Why the capability library is central
The capability library is the heart of the system. It is where the company's services, solutions, proof points, and preferred calls-to-action live in a structured and reusable form. Without this library, AI drafting would be generic. With it, the system can speak in the company's actual voice and connect specific business problems to specific offerings. This is what turns the platform from a lead list into a sales memory engine.
The library should hold the company's strongest ideas in a form the AI can use without inventing new ones. That means the content should be curated, versioned, and tagged. The system should know which capabilities belong to which service lines, which industries they fit, which objections they answer, and which outcomes they support. In practice, the better the capability library, the better the draft quality. If the library is weak, the AI has nothing reliable to work with.
10.2 What a capability asset should contain
A capability asset should be more than a paragraph of marketing text. It should carry the title of the service or solution, the problem it solves, the ideal customer profile, the industries where it is strongest, the proof points that support it, and the approved call-to-action that should follow it. It should also include key phrases the company wants to use consistently, the objections it commonly hears, and the evidence that can be safely mentioned in email.
This structure makes the asset reusable. A draft generator can use the same capability asset for a manufacturing account, a logistics account, or a professional services account if the fit is appropriate. The system does not need to re-invent the company's story every time. It only needs to map the right story to the right account context.
10.3 Solution packs and industry fits
The library should support the idea of solution packs. A solution pack is a grouped set of capability assets that work together for a particular industry or use case. For example, one pack may focus on cloud modernization, another on application support, another on data engineering, and another on managed services. Each pack can contain multiple proof points, CTAs, case studies, and objection responses. The pack gives the AI a compact range of choices when it needs to craft a message for a specific company type.
Industry tagging is useful here. If the company works well in certain sectors, the library should make that explicit. The same solution can be described differently for healthcare, manufacturing, finance, or logistics. The system should therefore be able to select a capability asset not only by service line but also by industry fit and likely role fit. This is how the message becomes relevant without becoming long.
10.4 Document ingestion and content extraction
The capability library should accept PDFs, Word files, PPTs, and similar assets. The raw file should be stored, the text should be extracted, and a structured summary should be created. The summary is what the AI should use most of the time. The raw file remains available for context and audit. Multiple versions of the same document should be kept so the team can see how the library evolved. The latest active version should be clearly marked.
Content extraction should also produce searchable tags. Tags can include service line, industry, problem type, proof type, and call-to-action type. If the company later wants semantic retrieval, it can add embeddings. But the first release does not need to depend on embeddings. Keyword and metadata search are enough to make the library usable. The key is not the retrieval technology. The key is the discipline of storing the right content in a structured form.
10.5 Content governance
The capability library must be curated. Not every internal document belongs there. The goal is to store approved claims, approved examples, and approved outcomes. Anything that sounds speculative or dated should be reviewed before it becomes source material for AI drafting. If the company has multiple people maintaining the library, there should be an owner or editor role that approves changes and keeps the active version clean.
This governance protects both brand and credibility. A sales message is strongest when it sounds specific and confident, but that confidence must rest on material the company can defend. The capability library is therefore more than a content store. It is a controlled source of truth for what the company can responsibly say about itself.
11. AI Prompt Architecture and Draft Generation
11.1 Prompt assembly
AI should never see the full raw spreadsheet as a blob of noise. The prompt builder should assemble only the fields that matter for a specific lead and a specific company. The minimum useful input usually includes contact name, title, role, company name, company domain, company research summary, relevant solution pack, selected capability snippets, and any prior interaction notes. If the system has a better relevant signal, it can include it. If not, it should keep the prompt small.
That constraint is what keeps the model useful. A large unfiltered prompt tends to invite generic output and hallucination. A narrow, curated prompt tends to produce sharper messaging. The prompt builder should also include explicit instructions about what the model can and cannot do. It should say that facts must come from the internal library or the curated company context. It should say that assumptions are allowed only when labeled. It should say that the output should be concise, businesslike, and tied to a clear call-to-action.
11.2 Source hierarchy
The model should operate from a source hierarchy. At the top is the internal capability library. Next is the company research card. Next is the cleaned contact record. Next is the source batch and message history. Finally, the style layer shapes how the message reads. If there is a conflict between a raw imported value and a curated capability claim, the curated capability claim should win. If there is a conflict between a guessed detail and a known fact, the known fact should win. The system should never let style overpower truth.
This hierarchy is what makes the system safe. It means the AI is not free to create a world view from scratch. It is arranging existing evidence into a message. When the evidence is incomplete, the draft should make that visible through a cautious tone or an assumption flag. The tool's job is to help the company write better, not to help it pretend it knows more than it does.
11.3 Output contract
The default output should be structured. At minimum, the model should return a subject line, body, and CTA. It can also return confidence, source snippets used, and assumption flags for internal review. The draft may be rendered as natural email text in the UI, but internally it should remain structured enough to inspect, regenerate, and store by version. This makes later analysis easier because the team can see which inputs produced which outputs.
The system should prefer one final version per lead by default. Multiple variants are useful only if the team explicitly wants them. Too many variants create noise and slow review. One clean draft, easy to edit, is better than a pile of nearly identical options. The regenerate button should exist, but it should feel like a deliberate choice rather than the normal path.
11.4 Claim control and hallucination guardrails
The draft engine should be tightly constrained. It should not invent partnerships, results, certifications, numbers, or implementation details that are not in the capability library or company notes. It should not make up a business problem the company does not actually face. It should not overstate certainty when the research card only suggests a possibility. If the system wants to mention a likely pain point, it should do so carefully and as a hypothesis, not as a fact.
The guardrails are not there to make the output bland. They are there to make the output credible. Good outreach rarely needs exaggerated language. It needs relevance, restraint, and a clear reason to respond. The model should therefore be encouraged to produce short, business-focused emails that point to one service angle and one obvious next step. The most useful draft is often the one that sounds like an informed person wrote it after a quick, thoughtful review of the account.
11.5 Human approval workflow
Every AI draft should enter a review queue before it is allowed into Outlook. The reviewer can edit the subject, body, or CTA. They can reject the draft if it is off-target. They can send it forward only when it feels accurate and aligned with company positioning. This is the main safety gate of the system. It is also how the company keeps control of tone and quality.
The review interface should make the source of the draft visible. The reviewer should be able to see which capability snippets influenced the draft, what company context was used, and whether the model marked any assumptions. If the draft is not good enough, the reviewer should be able to refine the inputs or choose another solution pack. That feedback loop gradually improves the system over time.
11.6 Message style
The default style should be concise, professional, and calm. The system is not trying to write a viral email or a dramatic pitch. It is trying to write a useful business email that opens a conversation. The tone should be tailored to IT services and consulting language without sounding overproduced. The draft should be confident enough to be specific, but restrained enough to be credible. The CTA should be direct but not forceful.
The best emails from this system will sound as if they were written by someone who knows the company's strengths, understands the target company's context, and is comfortable suggesting a sensible next step. That is the balance the platform should preserve in every draft.
12. Outlook Integration and Send Control
12.1 Authentication and mailbox setup
The sending layer should use the company's Outlook mailbox through Microsoft Graph or an equivalent supported Outlook integration. The mailbox connection belongs in settings and should be treated as a controlled credential, not as an invisible dependency. The platform should know which mailbox is active, what account is connected, and what daily sending rules apply to that account. If the token expires or the mailbox is disconnected, the system should surface the problem clearly.
This design preserves control because the company already trusts Outlook as the mailer. The platform is not replacing the mailbox. It is organizing the mail flow. That means the draft and queue system should respect mailbox policy, sending limits, and working hours rather than trying to outsmart them.
12.2 Draft creation
The default email outcome should be a draft, not an immediate send. Draft creation gives the human a final review point and keeps the platform aligned with a controlled outbound process. The draft should be visible in the system before it is written to Outlook, and the system should know which contact and which company each draft belongs to. The draft record should also carry the source snippets and prompt version that produced it.
This draft-first approach is important because it prevents accidental sends and protects the company if the AI output needs small corrections. A good draft can often become a great email with one or two human edits. The platform should therefore make editing easy and should never punish the reviewer for taking time to improve the message.
12.3 Send queue and rate limiting
Approved drafts should move into a send queue. The queue should enforce daily and hourly limits so the mailbox is not overloaded and deliverability remains under control. The system should also honor a working-hours window. If a draft is approved outside the send window, it should wait until the allowed time. Queue items should show their current state clearly: pending, scheduled, sent, failed, or paused.
The queue should be simple enough to trust. A user should be able to see what is waiting, what is already scheduled, what failed, and what needs attention. The platform should not try to be clever by hiding queue state behind a single "active" label. Clear queue status is what makes the system feel stable.
12.4 Follow-ups and pause controls
The system should support a small sequence: an initial email plus up to two follow-ups. Follow-ups should only continue if there is no reply, bounce, or suppression trigger. The intervals between messages should be configurable but not overly complex. A short, understandable sequence is more useful than a sprawling automation tree. Follow-ups are there to support persistence, not to create noise.
A one-click pause-all control should exist and should immediately stop new sends from leaving the queue. That control is essential for safety. If the team notices an issue with a template, a mailbox, or a segmentation rule, they should be able to stop the flow instantly. Resuming should require an intentional action. The system should also automatically pause a lead when a strong negative reply, an unsubscribe, or a bounce is detected.
13. Reply, Bounce, and Suppression Management
13.1 Reply synchronization
Incoming replies should be matched to the correct contact using threading or message identifiers whenever possible. The system should not rely only on subject lines or manual searches. Once a reply is linked, the lead should move into a replied state and the message should be visible to the reviewer. The system should also support a small number of automatic reply categories where the signal is obvious, such as out-of-office and unsubscribe.
For anything else, the safest path is to mark the contact as replied and let a human interpret the content. The system should not pretend to understand every reply. A simple reply marker with a review path is better than a brittle classifier that mislabels important responses. The team can always add more automation later if the data proves it is safe.
13.2 Bounce handling
Bounces should immediately remove the contact from future sends and add the event to the contact's history. The bounce should also feed the email health score so the system learns that the address is risky or invalid. Bounce handling is not just about avoiding one failed email. It is about protecting the quality of the list. Over time, bounce history is one of the strongest practical indicators of whether a record belongs in the active send set.
The bounce event should be visible both in the lead view and in the reporting layer. If the bounce rate spikes, the team should know. If one batch contains unusually many bounces, the batch should be easy to identify. The bounce system should therefore function as both a suppression mechanism and a diagnostic mechanism.
13.3 Suppression logic
Suppression should be permanent for unsubscribes and clearly negative responses. If a recipient says stop, the platform should respect that immediately and persistently. Bounced addresses, manual do-not-contact records, and internally flagged suppression records should also be excluded from drafting and sending. Suppression should not be treated as a soft filter that can be ignored by another screen. It should be a hard boundary.
Suppression removal should be rare and auditable. If a record is removed from suppression, the system should log who made the decision and why. That protects the company if someone later asks why a formerly suppressed contact was contacted again. A strong suppression model is one of the simplest ways to keep the platform safe and professional.
13.4 Health feedback loop
Reply and bounce signals should flow back into the health layer. A lead that replied might become more valuable for follow-up or account expansion. A lead that bounced becomes less viable for outbound. A lead that has not been touched in a long time can age into a stale category. These signals should not remain isolated in the inbox logic. They should influence the overall view of the contact base so the system gradually becomes more accurate and less noisy.
14. Search, Segmentation, and Lead Scoring
14.1 Search and filters
Users should be able to search by name, email, company, title, role, industry, location, tags, batch, and current status. The search experience should feel immediate and forgiving. The user should not have to remember exact capitalization or formatting. Search should support both direct lookups and broad filtering so the team can move from a single record to a whole segment without changing screens or tools.
For a database of this size, good indexing and careful query design are usually enough. The platform does not need to become a separate search product to be useful. The key is to make common lookup paths fast and predictable. A good internal tool should make the user feel that the records are organized, not that they are fighting the database.
14.2 Saved segments
Any useful filter combination should be savable as a segment. A segment may be dynamic, meaning it updates as the database changes, or static, meaning it captures a snapshot. Dynamic segments are useful for ongoing account groups. Static segments are useful for a fixed outreach list or a review queue. Both modes are valuable, and the system should support them without complicating the user interface.
Saved segments are one of the easiest ways to make the platform feel reusable. If a user repeatedly filters for a certain role, industry, company size, or capability fit, that work should be preserved. The system should make it easy to return to high-value lists without rebuilding the search every time.
14.3 Lead scoring
Lead scoring should be rules-based and simple. The score can reflect company fit, role fit, freshness, engagement signals, and data quality. The score is not a decision maker. It is a ranking aid. A high score means the lead is more promising for outreach or review. A low score means it may still be useful but should sit lower in the queue. The score should be easy to explain so the team can trust it.
The scoring engine should not become a complex condition builder unless the business truly needs that level of flexibility. A small set of configurable rules is usually enough for an internal system. The most important thing is that the score reflects the company's actual outreach priorities rather than a generic sales formula.
14.4 Bulk actions
The platform should support bulk actions such as tagging, segmenting, exporting, suppressing, queueing, and status updates. These actions should respect permissions and should create audit entries. Bulk action support is important because the data volume is high, and a large part of the team's work will be list-level work rather than individual-record work. At the same time, bulk actions should always show the user what is about to happen before the system executes them.
15. User Experience and Operating Screens
15.1 Dashboard
The dashboard should be the first place the team looks to understand the state of the system. It should show imported batches, duplicates waiting for review, leads ready for drafting, drafts waiting for approval, emails sent, replies received, bounces, suppressions, and current health counts. The dashboard should not try to tell every story. It should highlight the operational signals that matter right now.
A good dashboard for this system is not decorative. It is operational. It should help the user answer questions such as whether the last import went cleanly, whether the queue is backed up, whether bounce rate is rising, and whether any review queues need attention. The goal is to reduce uncertainty, not to add chart clutter.
15.2 Lead list
The lead list should be the central working screen. It should show the person, company, role, status, email health, score, source batch, and key actions. The user should be able to open a lead, inspect history, edit fields, review company context, and trigger draft generation from the same place. The list should support quick scanning and batch operations because that is where the volume lives.
The lead list should also make errors obvious. If a lead is risky, suppressed, or duplicated, the user should see it immediately. The platform should not bury problems beneath too many columns or too much empty space. The best list views are compact, fast, and informative.
15.3 Company view
The company view should consolidate all contacts, company notes, research cards, capability angles, and prior outreach history for one account. This is the place to understand whether the company is a real target and how the company story is evolving. The team should be able to see which contacts belong to the company, what the current message angle is, and whether the account has already been touched.
The company view is also the right place to add internal notes after a call or a research pass. If someone learns that a company is actively evaluating a certain problem, that note should become visible to everyone else working the account. This keeps account intelligence from living only in inbox memories.
15.4 Import screen
The import screen should be straightforward. The user uploads the file, maps the columns if needed, reviews the validation preview, and decides whether to commit the batch. Any row-level issues should be visible before the batch is merged. The screen should not ask the user to understand internal processing mechanics. It should show enough to make a safe decision.
15.5 Draft review screen
The draft review screen should present the AI output beside the contact and company context that produced it. The reviewer should be able to edit the subject, body, CTA, or even the selected capability snippet if the draft is not quite right. The screen should make approval easy and rejection equally clear. This is where the system keeps quality high without slowing the process to a crawl.
15.6 Queue and settings
The queue screen should show pending sends, scheduled items, failures, retries, and pause states. The settings screen should hold the Outlook configuration, send windows, daily caps, capability library settings, scoring rules, mapping profiles, suppression controls, and access permissions. These screens should be functional rather than flashy. Their job is to keep the operational controls accessible without cluttering the main workflow.
16. Reporting, Audit, and Operational Controls
16.1 Reporting
Reporting should cover batch imports, duplicate resolution, email health distribution, draft generation, approvals, sends, replies, bounces, suppressions, and queue health. The report set should be enough to tell whether the system is healthy, whether the list is improving, and whether the outreach process is producing usable signals. Reports should not become a second product. They should serve the operating loop.
The team should be able to answer simple questions quickly. How many rows were imported this week? How many were deduplicated? How many drafts were generated but not approved? How many sends were paused because of bounce activity? These are the kinds of questions an internal system must answer without friction.
16.2 Audit logging
Every important action should be logged. Imports, edits, merges, AI generation, approval, sends, replies, suppression changes, email health changes, and permission-relevant events all belong in the audit trail. The audit trail is append-only. It should not be editable by ordinary users. If a user changes a record, the system should know who did it, what changed, when it changed, and which source or operation triggered it.
The audit log is important because the platform is not just storing data. It is making decisions about whether a contact is safe to email and how the company should position itself. Those decisions must be visible later. A good audit log is one of the simplest forms of internal insurance.
16.3 Backup and recovery
The system should retain source files, historical batches, archived records, and audit events in a way that allows restoration if something goes wrong. Backup and recovery do not need to be visible in the day-to-day workflow, but they do need to exist as part of the design. The team should never feel that a bad merge or a bad import can permanently erase the company's work.
Recovery should be practical. If a batch needs to be restored, the system should know how to bring it back without rebuilding it from scratch. If a specific duplicate merge was wrong, the archive should make it possible to inspect the prior values. Recovery is part of trust.
16.4 Security and governance
The platform should use role-based access, encrypted credentials for Outlook, and clear ownership for the capability library. Sensitive operations such as suppression removal, template edits, and mailbox configuration should be restricted. The system should not make broad claims beyond what the internal knowledge base can support. Governance is not a bureaucracy layer here; it is the mechanism that keeps a small internal tool from drifting into confusion.
16.5 Consent and source tracking
Each contact should carry source and consent metadata. The platform should know where the record came from and whether it is allowed to be contacted. This metadata should be visible in the lead detail view and should feed suppression behavior. Even in an internal system, that traceability is useful because it prevents the team from treating all records as equally safe or equally current.
17. Non-Goals and Explicit Boundaries
The platform is not a CRM, a generic marketing automation engine, a lead-buying marketplace, or a public data scraping service. It is not meant to replace Outlook. It is not meant to replace human judgment. It is not meant to create unlimited branches of automation just because a workflow engine could support them. Every extra layer of complexity should be judged against the core purpose of the system: controlled, company-aware outreach grounded in internal capability knowledge.
The platform also should not depend on broad external intelligence to function. External context is useful only when it helps the company understand the target company and its industry. It should remain narrow, curated, and reviewable. The system should not try to know the whole market. It should try to know enough to write one good email to one good lead, and then do that repeatably at scale.
Appendix A. AI Prompt Contract
A.1 Required input structure
The AI drafting step should receive a compact, structured payload. The payload should include the contact identity, the company identity, the company research card, the relevant internal capability snippets, any prior interaction notes, and the desired outreach tone. It should not receive unfiltered spreadsheet columns. If a field is not relevant to drafting, it should stay out of the prompt. That discipline is one of the easiest ways to keep the model from drifting into generic output.
A.2 Drafting rules
The model should be instructed to use only verified internal materials for factual claims. It may use external company and industry context only as curated by the system. It may infer a likely business concern, but it must not state the inference as fact. It should keep the email concise, businesslike, and centered on one solution angle. It should aim for a believable next step such as a short discovery call, a quick review, or a conversation about whether the company might benefit from a specific service.
A.3 Output schema
{
  "subject": "",
  "body": "",
  "cta": "",
  "confidence_score": 0,
  "source_snippets_used": [],
  "assumption_flags": [],
  "review_notes": ""
}
The subject should be short and relevant. The body should be readable in a single glance without feeling thin. The CTA should be one line and should not try to close the entire relationship in one email. The confidence score should help reviewers triage drafts, not make the final decision for them. If the prompt context is weak, the model should say so clearly through its metadata instead of pretending certainty.
A.4 Failure behavior
If the model does not have enough company context or cannot find a matching internal capability, the system should not force a draft. It should flag the record for research, enrichment, or manual handling. Silence is better than invention. This is especially important when a lead is valuable but the internal library has not yet been populated with the right solution content. The system should surface that gap so the company can improve its own knowledge base.
Appendix B. Lead State Model
B.1 Lead states
The lead should move through a small set of states that are easy to understand. A record starts as new or imported. It becomes cleaned once the normalization pipeline has run. It may be marked duplicate if the system or a reviewer decides it is not a distinct record. Once it is clean and ready, it can enter drafting. After a draft is created, the record becomes drafted. After approval, it becomes queued. After delivery, it becomes sent. If a reply arrives, it becomes replied. If delivery fails, it becomes bounced. If the record should never be contacted again, it becomes suppressed. If the record is no longer active but should be kept for history, it becomes archived.
B.2 State transitions
State changes should happen because of clear actions or signals. Import creates imported records. Cleaning creates cleaned records. Deduplication may create duplicate or merged states. Draft generation moves a record into drafted. Approval moves it to queued. Delivery moves it to sent. Reply handling moves it to replied. Bounce handling moves it to bounced. Suppression moves it to suppressed. Archiving is a final housekeeping state for records that should remain available but no longer participate in active outreach. Manual overrides are allowed, but they must always be logged.
Appendix C. Data Source and Storage Rules
C.1 What must be preserved
The platform should preserve the original imported values, the normalized values, the current edited values, the batch source, and the audit trail. These layers are not optional. They are the memory of the system. If a value changes, the original should still be visible in history. If a row comes from a specific batch, that batch should remain traceable. If a record is corrected, the system should not pretend that the mistake never happened.
C.2 What can be normalized
The system can normalize formatting, casing, whitespace, domain strings, LinkedIn URLs, and other machine-friendly representations. It can also create match keys for deduplication and search. What it cannot do is erase the human-readable source form. A company may have a cleaned canonical name for matching, but the raw display form is still important. The same principle applies to contact names, addresses, and any other field where the source shape matters.
C.3 What should be excluded
The platform should exclude obviously empty columns, meaningless metadata, and any field that has no practical use for search, context, or outreach. The goal is not to keep every possible bit of source noise. The goal is to keep the parts that help the company make better decisions and write better emails. Storage should support clarity, not clutter.